# music-preference-prediction-simulator
Mimic the music recommendation algorithm used on the music streaming platforms

When the user listens to music on the platforms, the algorithm will try to learn the user’s listening habits, summarize user’s music preference such as what kind of genres they are into, what kind of emotions they desire within music and so on, and based on the learning outcome the algorithm can predict the music the user will likely favor and recommend users the songs they have never listened to. In this project we will pull out the music streaming history from one single user, split the dataset into training and testing sets, apply machine learning methods to learn the user’s listening habits from the training set, use our learned models to predict whether the user will like some other songs, and have a look at how well the machine learning methods perform using the testing set. How do we measure the extent of how a user like a song? Each song appear multiple times in the user’s streaming history, and also shows whether the user chooses to skip this song or not. We will compute the skip rate of each song, so that if the skip rate is high, it means the user does not like this song, if the skip rate is low it means the user really likes this song. We will do two machine learning methods. We will do linear regression to predict the skip rate of different songs based on the training set, and we will also do a classification, to predict whether we should classify songs as liked by the user, disliked by the user, or the user feels neutral to it. If we get a relatively low error rate when testing, that means the machine learning methods can be practical when used in the real-world situation of solving the same problem.

We are using two datasets found on Kaggle, one is a dataset showing the streaming history of a single user “spotify_history.csv”, the other one is a dataset showing detailed information of millions of songs “spotify_data.csv”. By merging these two tables we can have more features of the songs.

Both methods require numerical data so that we can fit them into the formulas. Track genre is probably the most important feature, so we will do one-hot encoding to track genres. The dataset originally contain 114 genres, and some genres may appear less than 10 times in the dataset, which is not enough to learn a good model. Therefore, we will only select 7 mainstream genres, with each genre appearing at least 100 times inside the dataset. Other features include duration_ms, popularity, danceability, energy, key, loudness, speechiness, acousticness, instrumentalness, liveness, tempo, mode and explicit. Since genres might be the most sparse feature, we carefully split the 1000 instances to 800 for training and 200 for testing, ensuring each genre having 80% of instances in the training set and 20% in the testing set.
